Release notes and migration guide ready to merge (#2370)
tinymce/tinymce-docs: modules/ROOT/pages/6.0-release-notes-ui-and-ux-elements-and-components.adoc

= TinyMCE 6.0 UI and UX elements and components changes
:navtitle: TinyMCE 6.0 UI and UX elements and components changes
:description: TinyMCE 6.0 UI and UX elements and components changes
:keywords: releasenotes, ui, ux

> This section documents the improvements, changes, fixes and removales made to {productname} 6.0 UI and UX elements and components.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section documents the improvements, changes, fixes and removals made to {productname} 6.0 UI and UX elements and components.
```

* xref:ui-and-ux-elements-and-components[UI and UX elements and components]
* xref:new-and-improved-ui-and-ux-elements-and-components][New and improved UI and UX elements and components]
* xref:changed-ui-and-ux-elements-and-components[Changed UI and UX elements and componen]
* xref:fixed-ui-and-ux-elements-and-components[Fixed UI and UX elements and components]
* xref:removed-or-deprecated-ui-and-ux-elements-and-components[Removed or deprecated UI and UX elements and components]

// tag::ui-and-ux-elements-and-components[]
[[ui-and-ux-elements-and-components]]
== UI and UX elements and components

[[new-and-improved-ui-and-ux-elements-and-components]]
=== New and improved UI and UX elements and components

[[buttontype]]
==== `buttonType`

> `buttonType` is a new property available as a basic panel component of `dialogs`.

Reviewer 2: This isn't quite correct... it's a new property that can be used for buttons components in dialogs. So maybe something like this?
```suggestion
`buttonType` is a new property available for button components used in dialogs.
```

It replaces the, now deprecated property, `primary`.

The `primary` property was boolean, allowing for only two states: `true` and `false`.

The new `buttonType` property can take any of three states: `'primary'`, `'secondary'`, and `'toolbar'`.

Setting `buttonType: 'primary'` is the same as setting `primary: true`.

Setting `buttonType: 'secondary'` is the same as setting `primary: false`.

> [[dialog-box-re-rendering]]
> ==== dialog box re-rendering
> 
> Previously, when a component in a {productname} dialog box changed — for example, when a _next_ or _previous_ button was clicked — the entire dialog box was re-rendered.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[[dialog-re-rendering]]
==== Dialog re-rendering

Previously, when a component in a {productname} dialog box changed — for example, when a _next_ or _previous_ button was clicked — the entire dialog box was re-rendered.
```

In {productname} 6.0, the `initialData` type is now `Partial<T>`, which matches the underlying implementation.

And, relatedly, the `redial` API now re-renders only the portions of a dialog that have changed.

[[format-painter]]
==== Format Painter

The *Format Painter* toolbar item now has a matching menu item: *Format › Format Painter*.

[[setdata]]

> ==== `setData` method in dialog API

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
==== `setData` method in the dialog API
```

The dialog API’s `setData` method now uses a deep merge algorithm.

Consequently, it now supports partial nested objects.

[[editor-text-entry-height]]
==== Editor text entry height

> In {productname} 5.x, editors without a specified `config.height` value defaulted to a 200px high text entry area.
> 
> In {productname} 6.0, editors without a specified `config.height` value default to a 400px high text entry area.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In {productname} 5.x, editors without a specified `height` value defaulted to a 200px high text entry area.

In {productname} 6.0, editors without a specified `height` value default to a 400px high text entry area.
```

The _Powered by Tiny_ text string set in the {productname} status bar is now the {productname} logo.

NOTE: The logo still responds appropriately when {productname} is used with a screen reader.

[[status-bar-path-delimiter-character-changed]]
==== status bar path delimiter character changed.

The default status bar path delimiter character (also known as a breadcrumb separator) has been changed.

It was `»` (the double, right-pointing, angled quotation mark).

It is now `›` (the single, right-pointing, angled quotation mark).

[[fixed-ui-and-ux-elements-and-components]]
=== Fixed UI and UX elements and components

[[anchor-elements-render-correctly]]
==== Anchor elements now render correctly when `allow_html_in_named_anchor: true`

When `allow_html_in_named_anchor` was set to `true`, content inside the anchor element was wrapped such that each character was set on a new line.

With this release, setting `allow_html_in_named_anchor: true` sets characters inside the anchor element as entered, with no wrapping of each character to a new line.

[[default-ui-theme-silver-renders-correctly]]
==== Default UI theme, silver, no longer renders incorrectly as plugins load

> Previously, {productname}’s default UI theme, `silver`, was initialised such that it rendered some UI components before plugins that, potentially, would over-ride or adjust the defaults presented by `silver`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Previously, {productname}’s default UI theme, `silver`, was initialised such that it rendered some UI components before plugins that, potentially, would override or adjust the defaults presented by `silver`.
```
Just to keep this consistent with what's used elsewhere 🤷

This resulted in these UI elements rendering incorrectly.

> With this release, `silver` no longer renders these UI elements before plugins get to over-ride or adjust, and these components no longer render incorrectly.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With this release, `silver` no longer renders these UI elements before plugins get to override or adjust, and these components no longer render incorrectly.
```

[[dialog-labels-render-correcttly]]
==== dialog labels now rendering correctly

Previously, {productname} dialog labels and other UI elements were rendered with HTML markup.

With this release, the `text` and `label` properties of these elements are now rendered as plain text, as expected.

[[editor-selection-setring]]
==== `editor.selection.setRng`

Calls to `editor.selection.setRng` now update the insertion point bookmark when focus is returned to the editor.

For the end-user, this change means content dragged from outside the {productname} editor into the editable area will be placed into the {productname} document where the insertion point appears as the drag is completed.

This is the expected behavior.

[[sub-menu-items-now-read-by-screen-readers]]
==== sub-menu items now read by screen readers

> Previously, navigating through {productname} menus using the keyboard did not cause screen readers to read out menu items.

Reviewer 2: This only happened on newer versions of Chrome so not sure if we want to clarify that?

Author: to quote my just sent commit message:

*sub-menu items now read by screen readers* section: text now explicitly notes the screen reader not working as expected only happened when the browser was Google Chrome.

However, when upgrading to {productname} 6.0, there are two things to be aware of:

First, {productname} 6.0 does not alter existing documents. Extant {productname} documents with tables that were aligned to either _left_ or _right_ will still have the `float` property assigned when opened and edited unless and until their *alignment* is altered.

If an extant {productname} document with an aligned table is opened using {productname} 6.0 and the *alignment* of the table is re-set, {productname} 6.0 will remove the `float` property and use the `margin` property to set the *alignment*.

Second, if the previous behavior is required, a custom `format` will need to be created.

[[text-presentation-corrections-on-some-UI-elements]]
==== Text presentation corrections on some UI elements

The text on some buttons and menu items incorrectly presented in Title Case.

The underlying strings have been corrected and these items now present in sentence case, as expected.

[[removed-or-deprecated-ui-and-ux-elements-and-components]]
=== Removed or deprecated UI and UX elements and components

[[mobile-theme]]
==== `mobile` theme

> The `mobile` theme was deprecated when integrated support for mobile devices was  added to {productname}.
> 
> The theme has been removed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `mobile` theme was deprecated when integrated support for mobile devices was  added to the `silver` theme.

The `mobile` theme has been removed.
```
Maybe? It's just that the mobile theme was part of TinyMCE so that part of the sentence didn't make much sense.

[[primary]]
==== primary

> the `primary` property was a boolean property available as a basic panel component of `dialogs`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `primary` property was a boolean property available for button components used in dialogs
```
